---
layout: post
title: Predicting Wins in Baseball - All About OPS and WHIP
---

Weeks two and three at Metis focused on Linear Regression, and for my project I decided to explore Predicting Wins in Major League Baseball. My initial foray into the subject was to determine how valuable Total Payroll was in predicting team wins and while my initial thought was that the correlation stood somewhere around .40, I was somewhat surprised to find that the actual correlation was around .15.  While there is some correlation between a higher payroll and wins, it is certainly not statistically significant.

The next stage of analysis was to add some more off-the-field metrics to see if there might be some predictive value there.  I looked at the average age of pitchers and catchers per team, team attendance, ballpark adjustments to offensive and defensive stats, and the top player per team as valued by WinsAboveReplacement (WAR).  In looking at all of these new features, the correlation to wins jumped to .53 with the most additive value coming from Top Player WAR.  I was surprised to see this as my gut told me that one player, no matter how good, would not be able to make a significant impact to wins since baseball is such a diversely rostered sport between pitchers and hitters, offense and defense.  Of course gut and data science don't necessarily mix as The Top Player WAR alone had a .25 correlation to wins, almost twice that of Payroll.

While .53 is not a terrible correlation to wins for off-field metrics, I wasn't satisfied and decided to look at a wide variety of on-field statistics in both offensive and defensive categories. The two metrics that stood out the most were OPS (On Base Percentage + Slugging) and WHIP (Walks + Hits/Innings), with the combined predictive ability of those two features a resounding .78.  What I like about the analysis is that those two metrics are not specific values of Runs Scored and Runs Against, but instead are somewhat of a derivative.  And while OPS dictates how strong a player or team is at getting on base and hitting for power and WHIP a strong determinant of how many runners are allowed on, I was surprised to see how strong they were at predicting actual runs scored and given up, and thus wins per team.  When combined with the other off-field features, the total correlation to wins jumped to .82.

The conclusion of my analysis is that while we continue to look for the small nuances in baseball that affect success, the game is still dictated by how much you can get on base on offense and how much you can keep the bases clean on defense.  And the search for players needs to focus on individual attributes that leads to success in these categories.  The next stage of the anlaysis is to look at individual players to see what remote features of their game might be improving to lead to better OPS and WHIP.  For instance, batters' "hard hit ball" rates combined with number of line drives and fly balls.  Or a pitcher's ability to get ahead with First Pitch Strike%.  The future of the game continues to be wrapped in data, but as proven by this study, the science will always come back to the game itself and the ability to get on base.
  
